Hey everyone, and thanks for dropping
back into the cryptoverse.
Today, we're going to talk about
Bitcoin.
The psychology of a bear market. If you
guys like the content, make sure you
subscribe to the channel, give the video
a thumbs up, and also check out the sale
on into the cryptoverse premium at
intothecryptoverse.com.
In case you missed it yesterday,
uh or maybe 2 days ago, I did announce
that I'm planning on throwing
uh my first conference, hopefully later
this year. I mean, things are kind of
sort of up in the air at this point, but
if you are interested in attending,
um
you can sign up to receive updates.
It'll probably It'll probably be in Q4.
Uh maybe Miami, we're still trying to
figure that out. But, if you're curious
and you want to get updates about it, in
case you want to go, uh you can always
just add your email in the um in the
form, and that way in the future you can
get uh updates. I'm sure I'll also tell
you here as well, but uh just if you
want to get updates there. Let's go
ahead and jump in here. So, so Bitcoin
is trading just below $78,000, and
I I just sort of want to reiterate the
psychology of a bear market, and why it
is so hard.
Um
there's a few points I'd like to make,
right? And one of those is that bear
markets always,
and I mean always, make make fools of
both bulls and bears. So,
sometimes it actually is
psychologically, emotionally easier
being a bull in a bear market,
because often times in bear markets, the
market will actually trend up. So, if
you're a bull
in a bear market, you feel like you're
the one that's right for a long time,
and then there's just a few weeks where
the market breaks down and and it proves
you wrong, but that doesn't mean that
you weren't like cashing in on the
credibility of being the bull for
several weeks or several months before
the market eventually proves that it was
still in fact a bear market. So,
bear markets make fools of both bulls
and bears. They make fools of the bulls
because well, the market keeps breaking
down. Eventually, they make fools of the
bears because the market trends up for
months at a time.
Now,
I wanted to push back a little bit
because there there's some
sort of sentiment going around that this
is different, right? Like this time is
different and we've never trended up
this long in a in a bear market in the
past and I I would say that's just
objectively not true, right? Like it's
it's not true that we haven't seen these
types of rallies in the past. In fact,
in 2018,
Bitcoin found a low in February,
found a higher low in late March, early
April, and did not even take out the
February low until June. And it and it
was late June and when it took it out,
it only barely took it out. Right? Like
imagine if you flipped bullish on
Bitcoin
at say $6,000 in February 2018. You were
right to be bullish
many like during many of these rallies.
The problem is while you felt like you
were the one that was right, eventually
the market broke down in Q4 and it led
to sort of the market cycle bottom. Um
Now, back in 2018, that was when I was
in my last year of grad school and I I
honestly like I didn't even look at the
market from like I I think it was like
from like March until September. Because
I had other things to worry about,
frankly. And but but I mean I was
working on my dissertation, right? But I
mean the bigger thing is, you know,
there was just nothing I could do about
it. I didn't know exactly what the
market was going to do, but I wasn't
just going to waste my life watching the
bear market play out. I I had other
things I wanted to accomplish.
So, some of the times it's okay to just
kind of like take a step back for a
while and just let the markets do their
thing. I mean, it's going to The
market's still going to be there,
hopefully. Um you know, if you take a
break. Uh so, just consider that. So, I
would say the psychology of a bear
market is so difficult because you get
so many of these rallies. And
if you look at the amount of time it
will take in a bear market to put in a
new low, I want to show you how this
time is not really that different. Look
in 2022 when we put in the low in June.
How long did it take to put in a new
low? About 21 weeks.
How long in 2018 after the February low
did it take to put in a new low?
About 19 weeks.
If you look at
2022, it didn't take as long, but still
took about 15 weeks from that, you know,
from that low.
If you go from the June low in 2018
to then when we took that low out, took
about 21 weeks.
So, in 2014 from the low in April to
take that out,
it took about 25 weeks.
So, you can see that, you know, we've
had
some of the longer ones, 19 weeks, 21,
21, and 25. Yes, there was also this one
that was 15 as well. But
it can often take 19, 21, 25 weeks to
put in a new low.
And when you look at how long it has
been,
it's only been 14 weeks, right? Like
it hasn't even been 19, it hasn't been
21, it hasn't been 25. If it takes 19
weeks, that would put the next low
in June. And note that
major lows have occurred in June before,
right? June of 2018, June of 2022.
There is a chance, and again, this is
where the, you know, sort of the
um
the snide comments come from, you're
saying it could go up or down.
But there is a chance, like in 2014,
that a high was set in June, and then
you went down into October. June is
often a turning point for the market um
in a lot of the bear market years,
right? It'll often put in lower highs in
June, even in 2019, the high came in
June.
So, I think you'll likely either see a
high or low in June,
um but regardless of what happens in
June, I still think you'll go lower into
October. Okay? And and so,
if it took 19 weeks, it'd be about
mid-June. If it took 21 weeks,
you're looking at at late June, and if
it took 25 weeks, you're talking about
late July. Now, here's the thing. In
2014,
when June was a high,
right here,
you still had a pretty big drop the
following week, right? Like after that
rally into very early June. By the way,
the the rally topped in early June. It's
only like 2 weeks from now.
Right after that, you had about a 23%
drop, a countertrend move, and then from
that top, then another 30% drop very
soon thereafter. So, look,
right now, Bitcoin is still struggling
with the 200-day moving average,
and that is an area that it often
struggles with in bear markets, is that
200-day moving average. You can see that
it provided resistance uh in 2022, and
it also provided resistance in 2018.
Now, in 2019, you can see we got through
the 200-day moving average. And in 2014,
we got through the 200-day moving
average very briefly, right? So, like it
it can happen. I'm not here to say that
it's impossible for it to happen. In
fact, again, looking at the fib
retracement stuff, you can see that
often times Bitcoin does rally back up
to the 0.382 before then going down into
the next, sort of the leg of the bear
market. And in 2014, that high came in
June.
In 2018, after that initial drop in the
February, the rally to the 0.382 came in
February and March.
In 2022,
the rally to the 0.382
occurred in April.
Right?
In 2019,
it went a little bit higher, right? It
actually rallied all the way up to the
0.5 before it went down. The point is is
like, no matter how high it rallied in
those bear markets, it then eventually
rolled over.
And so, for me, like I can't sit here
and tell you with, you know,
a strong, you know, strong confidence
that that I know exactly where Bitcoin
will find that resistance at. I mean,
could it be the 200-day moving average
like it was the last two cycles?
Absolutely, right? I mean, when you
look, you know, if you look at at say
the year-to-date ROI of Bitcoin,
in midterm years,
we are getting pretty extended if you
want to compare it to prior midterm
years, right? Like if you if you add one
standard deviation, we're actually
outside of those bounds. And so, if
we're going to set a low in June, we
need to start going down very quickly
because if we just bounce back next
week, then you likely set the high in
early June and then go down into October
like we did in
in 2014. So,
I think my argument here is that right
now, when you say compare
um
like if you compare this 2026 to 2014,
we've already had that rally to the
level that we're currently you know that
we had in two in 2014 by June, which is
why I'm not a huge fan of that of that
model. In 2018, you can see the lows
kind of line up. February low, late
March, early April low, put in a high
sort of in the May time frame, then head
back down into June. And then if you
look at 2022, you can see that we
actually level we actually rallied to
levels even higher than where we are
right now.
Um earlier in the year before the next
leg of the bear market began.
So,
bear markets are are tough
psychologically. And one of the things I
said back in Q4, when we said we were
going into a bear market and a lot of
people faded it and thought that we were
going into a super cycle,
what we said was like there's no point
in really trying to time these things
from a trading perspective. It's more of
like for me it's just more of an
academic exercise. I don't know exactly
when the counter trend rallies are going
to happen.
It's more so just looking at the market
and saying, "Look, we're most likely in
a bear market. You will likely have
rallies that they're that are tactical
that will then likely lead to
a lower low."
One of the things about Bitcoin is
there's two examples to take from to
compare the current price action.
There's the 2018 bear market, Trump was
president back then during the midterm
year, and Bitcoin was bouncing off a 6K.
This time, Trump is president during the
midterm year,
and Bitcoin is bouncing off 60K.
You could also compare it to 2019
because the 2019 top right there
was a an apathetic top. There was no
rotation into altcoins, and the top
occurred two months before quantitative
tightening ended. So, there's relevance
to compare the current bear market to
the one in 2018 because of seasonality
in terms of midterm years, but also to
compare the one in 2019 in terms of how
it played out with respect to monetary
policy. And if you look at the 2019 bear
market compared to the current one, you
can see that we dropped. We then got a
little bit of a rally. Um
and and then we ultimately went into the
the pandemic-induced recession. The
point is is like yes, clearly I'm not
saying that this would have happened if
we didn't have the recession, but the
point is is
we had two bear markets
where you found support at 6K.
And now you have this bear market where
we found support
at 60K.
In both cases, in both cases
Bitcoin eventually went below 4,000 in
both cases.
One of the times it was due to a
pandemic.
The other time it corresponded to a
correction by the S&P in the second half
of the midterm year. So, when we had the
2018 bear market, you can see that
Bitcoin
it's not fair. It might not seem fair,
but it's just the way the market works.
The S&P got a drop early in the year and
that corresponded to the first leg down
by Bitcoin. And then the stock market
got a second leg down in the year and
that corresponded to Bitcoin going even
lower. So, this time
Bitcoin went down first with the first
drop in the stock market.
And then if there's another drop later
in the year, which I think there will
be, that would correspond to the second
drop by Bitcoin in the bear market.
The point is is Bitcoin found support at
$6,000
in both 2018
and in 2019.
Just like it found support at 60k
in 2026.
And in both cases,
regardless of the narrative, Bitcoin
eventually went below $4,000.
Now, the reason why that's interesting
is because if you look at the balanced
price of Bitcoin. Bitcoin historically
goes below the realized price
and the balanced price in a bear market.
You can see it did it in 2011, 2014,
2015, 2018, even in 2020, also in 2022.
And right now, the realized price for
Bitcoin is at around 54k.
And the balanced price is around 39k.
So, if there is a narrative to accompany
Bitcoin on another leg down as we go
into October,
if we're sitting here and it's October
or Q4 and Bitcoin is trading around like
40k,
it will not have been any different than
either 2018 or 2019. The only difference
is the exact path we used to get there.
And my guess is that it won't play out
like either 2018 or 2019 exactly. And it
already isn't. Well, some of the
differences between say 2018 and this
and 2026 is in 2018, the high we had in
March was higher than the high we had in
May.
But in 2026, the high we got in March
was lower than the potential high we
have in May.
In 2019, when we dropped down to 3k or
below 4k, we dropped like 3800, it was
because of a recession where the
unemployment rate spiked to like 15%
overnight. I don't expect that to
happen, right? But I I could see a you
know, a large correction um
sometime, you know, later this year. And
look, there's a couple of ways this
could play out. You know, one way is it
plays out like it did in 2018 where
where Bitcoin
kind of drops back down, sweeps the low
from February. Maybe it then goes all
the way back up and and goes up to 85k.
That's where the 0.382 is. And then it
drops, right? Like that It could
absolutely play out like that. That's a
possibility.
It could also
do something like this where it just
goes straight up to slightly above the
200-day moving average before dropping
down here. The point is is every bear
market
every bear market and I don't know if it
doesn't have to go to 85. I'm just
saying it historically we've seen
resistance at the 0.382, which this
cycle corresponds to 85k. We also
historically find resistance at 200-day
moving average, which historically
occurs now.
The point is is every good bear market
has a few very convincing countertrend
rallies
that make the bears look dumb.
And that's why I say
in bear markets
bear markets make fools of both bulls
and bears. You can't go through a bear
market as a bear and feel like you're
smart the entire way and like you're on
the right side of the market because the
reality is the market spends more time
going up
than going down.
And you can actually see the bull market
was the exact opposite of that. Look at
this. So, let's mark the market cycle
top
um in October
and look at how things shifted after the
market cycle top. All right, look at
this.
Because it becomes very obvious.
In the bull market
Bitcoin would trend down and break up.
Trend down for a long time, break up.
Trend down
break up.
Then when the bull market ended, we now
trend we now go we break down quickly
and then trend up. We break down quickly
and then trend up.
So, the bull market made the bulls feel
like they were on the wrong side for
months at a time and then you would go
up very briefly
and then trend down for a long time and
then go up very briefly. Right? The the
bear market is the opposite, right? You
break down very quickly
and then you just spend a lot of time
trending higher. You break down very
quickly and then you just spend months
trending higher. So,
if the bear market view is right, if the
bear market view is right, then
you know, there's going to be a lot of
people that are going to look at this in
in a few months and be like, "Oh, they
were the bulls that thought they were
right for months and months and months,
but then in reality the bear market
continued on anyways."
Now, look, I could be wrong. Maybe I'm
on the wrong side of this. I'm not
completely oblivious to that potential
outcome. Um
but if you are an investor,
then it makes sense in my opinion to not
just be all in on one asset and
you know, if you have things in your
portfolio besides Bitcoin, you can see
that Bitcoin has been bleeding to a lot
of other things in your portfolio. Like
if you've had exposure to gold or or the
S&P or international markets or emerging
markets, um
or even silver, right? Even even even
though it had a big correction, Bitcoin
is down against all of those things this
year.
So, if you went into midterm years and
just thought, "You know what? I know
Bitcoin's going to have some counter
trend rallies.
Let it, right? I'm going to focus on
where the bull market is."
And and and and what is actually
bullish. I'm not going to try to lose
all my money trading counter trend
rallies in something that's just putting
in lower highs while these other markets
are just putting in new all-time highs.
It's cope, right? Like it's cope that
people rely on these countertrend
rallies. Like I mean, think about it.
Like think about how far we've dropped.
And and for the for the bulls to look at
77k, I know 77k or 80k or even 85k
feels like a win.
But the reality is Bitcoin was trading
at at above these prices for basically
all of last year.
So like all the bulls over here haven't
made any money. You know, they've just
been bull posting about Bitcoin. It
hasn't gone anywhere.
Right? I mean, the reality and and and
and and here's the thing. I'm not going
to you know, I'm I'm not here to
you know, to just tell you that every
you know, the asset that I'm that I'm
talking about is is only ever going to
go up. That's not true. I mean, for as
much as Bitcoiners dunked on gold, you
know, since December 2024, Bitcoin is
down 58% against gold. Right? I mean, so
there's a there's the narrative
and then there's what actually happens.
And even the rally that Bitcoin has has
had right now, you can see that Bitcoin
has rallied about 45% against gold.
So what?
It rallied 47% against gold in July
2022.
In March, it rallied 38% against gold.
In 2018,
Bitcoin rallied
almost 100% against gold. Then it
rallied about 50 percent against gold.
Then it rallied another 50% against
gold. And yet it still eventually broke
down.
In 2019,
Bitcoin rallied about 50% against gold.
And then another right here about 39%
against gold. And yet all of these
eventually broke down. So
I it's hard to look at that and and and
think that that this time is different.
What I see with the Bitcoin gold
valuation is I see a pretty well-defined
high
up here.
And potentially
a well-defined low down there.
Which means the most likely outcome
as far as I'm concerned,
is that Bitcoin trends down into Q4,
while gold probably goes up. And then
when you get that collectively, it means
that come from the current valuations,
Bitcoin drops another 45% against gold.
Seems like a a likely outcome to me.
So, those are my views.
If you know, if you like that, then you
might like the conference that we're
going to try to put on. Cuz again, the
conference is not just going to be
Bitcoin. We're we're going to try to
talk about different things,
um try to get like-minded people
together.
That's the goal, right? That's the goal.
We're not going to be there to just
shill
random narratives that no one really
cares about, you know? Uh the reality is
is a a lot of a lot of things that are
talked about
in the markets and there people just
don't care about those narratives. They
want to actually have realistic dialogue
um about about the markets without
feeling like they're doing something
that's going to get them hated by
everyone, right? Like it's okay to be
long-term bullish on an asset like
Bitcoin, but to recognize that there are
times when Bitcoin underperforms the
market. And mid-term years,
that's the main year that Bitcoin
underperforms. And that doesn't mean
that Bitcoin is a bad asset, it just
means that this is the market that we
have. And if anything,
it represents opportunities.
The people that got rich on Bitcoin over
the last 10 years are are are the people
that bought it at the end of mid-term
years. Yes, if you just DCA'd as well,
but imagine if you just went if you He
on strong bets for Bitcoin
at the end of every midterm year.
That's where all the money was made. You
know, midterm years provide
opportunities.
And some people fight the trend the
entire way, and then other people don't.
But those are my views. If you guys like
the content, make sure you subscribe to
the channel, give the video a thumbs up.
And again, check out the sale on Into
the Cryptoverse Premium at
intothecryptoverse.com.
And if you are curious about the
conference,
go to benjamincowan.com, and then you
can click on the conference tab, or you
just go to benjamincowan.com/conference.
Um
and you can you can put in your
information, and then we'll get you the
details once we actually have the
details um as to how, you know, what
this is going to look like. And nothing
here is set in stone. It's probably
going to be in Q4. It's probably going
to be in Miami. Both of those could
change. So, don't get married to that.
Uh but I I would like to have something
where we can all meet up and and and and
talk about the market. So,
we'll go ahead and wrap it up there.
Thank you guys for tuning in. I'll see
you next time. Bye.